# Tutorial: Branching and Merging

## Create a branch to complete the data cleaning checklist
As data analysts, we often have to clean our data. To make sure we've addressed the most common issues with dirty data, our team has created a common checklist for types of data quality issues to check and address. Let's add that the handbook for easy reference.

Instead of doing this directly on the main version of the handbook, we will create a dedicated branch for development. 

1. Make sure you are starting in the main branch! Do a quick `git status` check or type `git branch`. If you don't want to check, just try to switch to the main branch (`git switch main`), which will either switch to that branch or do nothing if you're already there. There are lots of ways to check!
2. Create a new branch to modify the data cleaning checklist: `git branch data-cleaning-checklist`.
3. If you want to make sure you created it, type `git branch`. You'll see you're still on the main branch (in green, with an asterisk) but the `data-cleaning-checklist` branch now appears. 
4. Switch to the new branch using `git switch data-cleaning-checklist`.
5. Edit the README file (again, using editor of your choice) to add the following checklist items under the `### Data Cleaning Checklist` header:

```
- [ ] Remove duplicates and irrelevant entries.
- [ ] Handle missing data by using appropriate techniques (e.g., mean imputation, deletion).
- [ ] Standardize data formats (e.g., date formats, text case).
- [ ] Detect and treat outliers using appropriate techniques (e.g., remove, transform).
- [ ] Validate the consistency and accuracy of datasets before analysis.
- [ ] Document all data cleaning changes to ensure transparency and reproducibility.
```

5. Save the file, then check status to ensure your modifications are tracked.
6. Stage README for commit by typing `git add README.md`.
7. Commit the changes with a descriptive commit message: `git commit -m "Populated data cleaning checklist"`.

## Merge the branch into main
We're done with our edits, and we're ready to put these changes into production!

1. Switch back to the main branch using `git switch main`.
2. Check your README file (using text editor of choice): you'll notice the data cleaning checklist section is empty again, because we're back on the main branch where no changes have been made.
3. Merge your changes from the `data-cleaning-checklist` branch by typing `git merge data-cleaning-checklist`.
4. Look at the README file again, notice how the changes are now there! 
3. Now that we're done with our edits, delete the branch we created: `git branch -d data-cleaning-checklist`.

## Create a branch for the visualization guidelines
Now, we are going to populate the data visualization guidelines section using a similar workflow. Here, we're going to end up in a situation where multiple branches contain edits to the same line of text. We'll resolve merge conflicts in the next section.

1. Create a new branch and switch to it, this time using one command `git switch -c data-viz-guidelines`.
2. Edit the README file to add a few guidelines for data visualization under the `### Data Visualization Guidelines` header:

```
- Use clear and appropriate visualizations for your data (e.g., bar charts, scatter plots).
- Ensure charts are labeled properly with titles, axes labels, and legends.
- Use color schemes that are accessible and highlight key insights.
- Avoid clutter and maintain simplicity in visualizations.
- Maintain consistency in design elements across visualizations.
- Use appropriate scales and intervals for axes.
- Limit the number of categories or data points shown at once.
- Provide context for the data.
```

3. Add the file. 
4. Commit the changes with a descriptive commit message.
5. Check the log using `git log --oneline` (the `--oneline` flag condense the commits into one line, with just the hash and commit message, to make it easier to read). Notice how the head is pointing to the current branch and most recent commit, and the main branch is still reflecting the previous commit.
6. Switch back to the main branch (`git switch main`) and check the log again; what looks different?
7. Go back to your feature branch (`git switch jb/data-viz-guidelines`). (Pro tip: tab complete also works for branch names.)

## Create a branch for more visualization guidelines
Now, you realize that you forgot one guideline you meant to add. Because you know that each branch should contain discrete changes, you create another branch with that additional guideline. Here it's very important to make sure that you are branching off of the main branch.

1. Switch back to the main branch by typing `git switch main`.
2. Create a new branch: `git switch -c another-data-viz-guideline`.
3. Edit the README file to add one guideline for data visualization under the `### Data Visualization Guidelines` header. Note that this section is empty; JB's changes are in a separate branch and have not been merged in.

```
- Use whitespace effectively to enhance readability and prevent clutter.
```

4. Add the file.
5. Commit the changes with a descriptive commit message.
6. Check the log. It should look pretty similar to the log in JB's branch.

## Merge in changes; resolve merge conflicts

1. Switch to main: `git switch main`.
2. Merge in JB's changes: `git merge data-viz-guidelines`.
3. Try to merge in YZ's changes: `git merge another-data-viz-guideline`. You encounter conflicts!
4. Resolve merge conflicts in your text editor of choice. Git makes it pretty clear which changes are coming from which branch, so you can review and decide whether you want to keep only one set of changes, or manually make decisions about how to combine them. This one is easy to resolve; we'll just merge our bulleted lists together. Make sure you are deleting the lines starting with `<<<<<`, `=====`, and `>>>>>` when you are done.  
5. Add README file; commit with a descriptive message. You've made changes in that tracked file so you will need to add and then commit again.
6. Check the log using the `--graph` flag as well - note how the different branches are represented. 
7. Clean up both branches: `git branch -d data-viz-guidelines` and `git branch -d another-data-viz-guideline`.
8. Check the log one more time; you'll notice those other branches are no longer represented because we deleted them.
