# Tutorial: Remote Collaboration 

Here, we'll clone my `wsds_short_course_2024` and make changes to the global README file that I've already created. Each person will add a best practice for version control they learned in this course.

## Clone a Repo

1. In Git Bash or terminal, navigate to the directory you'd like to put this repository in (e.g., the directory that will be the parent of your repo). **It is very important that you do NOT clone this repository into an existing git-tracked repository.**

    - Option A: using file explorer, navigate to the directory. Copy the address. In Git Bash, type `cd ` (note the space after cd) and then paste the address (SHIFT+INS).
    - Option B: within Git Bash, navigate to your directory using `cd ` command.

2. In Github, go to https://github.com/juliabuffinton/wsds_short_course_2024.
3. Click the green "<> Code" button in the upper right. Make sure you are on the **HTTPS** tab (we haven't set up SSH); copy the URL to your clipboard.
4. In Git Bash, type `git clone ` (note the space after clone) and then paste (SHIFT+INS) the URL. 
5. Navigate into to that repository by typing `cd wsds_short_course_2024`.

## Create your own branch and submit a PR

1. Create a branch with a descriptive name and your assigned number, e.g., `git checkout -b YOUR_NUM/version-control-best-practices`.
2. Navigate to the "tutorial" folder (`cd tutorial`) and open the README in a text editor of your choice. 
3. Add a version control best practice to the line you are assigned. Don't forget to save!
4. Stage the changes; commit them with a message like `git commit -m "add version control best practice #YOUR_NUM`.
5. Push them to the remote repository. When you do, git will provide you with the URL in GitHub for your branch and recommend that you create a pull request (PR). 
6. Copy the URL (remember: `CTRL+INSERT`) and navigate to it in your browser.
7. The title of the PR will default to the latest commit message; you can leave it or modify it, just make sure your number is in the title. Add me as a reviewer. Click the green "Create pull request" button.

## Review a peer's PR
1. Review the pull request of the peer with the number immediately following yours (e.g., #1 reviews #2, #2 reviews #3. The last number should review #1.) by navigating to the PR with a title containing their number, and then clicking on the "Files changed" tab to see line by line changes. 
2. If your peer modified the correct line of the README, click on the line and write a comment that says `"This is a great best practice."` Click the "Start a review" button.
3. Click the green "Finish your review" button in the upper right. Make sure you check the "Approve" radio button and then the green "Submit review" button. 
4. Tell your peer that you completed the review and approved the PR. 

## Merge your approved PR into the main branch
5. Once your PR has been reviewed/approved, navigate to it in GitHub. Click the "Merge pull request" button at the bottom.
6. Once you see the purple indicator that the branch has been merged, click the "Delete branch" button. Note: this only deletes the branch in the remote repository. We'll clean up our local repository in the next step.

## Pull changes from remote to local repository; clean up

1. In Git bash, navigate back to the main branch (`git checkout main`).
2. Check the status of your git repository, do you see any indicators of the changes made remotely? No? That's because we haven't fetched them.
3. Type `git fetch` to retrieve updates from the remote repository. Remember: this doesn't merge them yet.
4. Check the status again, you should now see that you're behind the remote repo by a handful of commits.
5. Follow git's suggestion to use `git pull` to update your local branch.
6. Check your README file in a text editor of your choice; everyone's best practices should now be reflected there!
7. Clean up your local branch (it's no longer needed now that we've merged) by typing `git branch -d YOUR_NUM/version-control-best-practices`.