# Tutorial: Advanced Git

This section is a bit of a potpourri of additoinal commands and topics that will enhance your experience using Git and GitHub. I've done my best to combine them into a coherent workflow!

## Create a .gitignore file

Git will, by default, keep an eye on every file in a local repository. However, that might not be desired behavior all the time. In fact, it often isn't. So, you can create a file that lists all the files, directories, and types of files that Git should ignore. 

When creating a remote repository in GitHub, you can configure the repo at the outset to create a .gitignore file (there are templates depending on the type of project/coding language you're using) but if initializing a repo locally, you'll need to create it yourself.

1. Navigate to the top-level folder in the `wsds_short_course_2024` repo if you're not already there. 
2. Switch to a new branch, `add-gitignore`.
2. Create a new (empty) csv file using the command `touch sample_data.csv`.
3. Check the status of your repo; notice how `sample_data.csv` is now listed as untracked. However, it's best practice not to track data files: git is not optimized for large files, this may potentially exposure snesitive data, and the dynamic nature of data means there may be frequent changes causing the repo size to grow. There are better options!
4. We could just do nothing, and never stage it for commit, or we can tell Git to never consider tracking data-like files (e.g., csv, Excel files). Create a .gitignore file using the command `touch .gitignore`.
5. Double check it was created using `dir -a` (Windows) or `ls -a` (Mac/Linux).
6. Open the file using your editor of choice and add a few lines:

```
# Ignore data-like files 
*.xlsx
*.xls
*.csv
```

This tells Git to ignore any files with xlsx, xls, and csv file extensions.

7. Check the status of your repo again; you'll see the csv file is no longer listed! However, you'll need to add the .gitignore file. Commit that to your local repo.

## Make some changes, stash them

Now, let's go back to our README where we added best practices. We're going to try to add one more best practice. 

1. Switch to the `version-control-best-practices-YOUR_NUM` branch.
2. Edit the README file; add a new best practice underneath the one you had previously drafted.
3. Realize that there's a potential confict with the main branch; switch back to it to check. 
4. Get an error! Git will recommend you stash your changes; follow its recommendation by typing `git stash`.
5. Now you can switch to the main branch and see the changes that were made in the remote repository.
6. Switch back to your `version-control-best-practices-YOUR_NUM` branch.
7. Add and commit your changes: `git commit -m "update readme"`.

## Amend your commit

Uh oh, you realize you wrote a vague commit message. Try to change it!

1. Type `git commit --amend` to open up the commit in your terminal.
2. Edit the first line to say "update readme to add additional best practice". Save!
3. Check the log and see how your commit message has changed. 
4. Realize that you meant tto add an exclamation point to your best practice, you are really excited about it! Edit your README again to add it. 
5. You don't want to set this up as a totally unique commit, since it's just the addition of an exclamation point. Add the file to the staging area. 
6. Commit it using the amend command: `git commit --amend`.

## Make another change, then decide to discard it

1. Edit your README again with yet another best practice. Save it!
2. Add your file to the staging area.
3. Decide that you want to add an exclamation point to this best practice, too; type `git restore --staged README.md`. This will bring the file out of the staging area.
4. Add the exclamation point and save the file.
5. Ultimately decide that you don't want to include this best practice. Roll back to the version from the previous commit using `git restore README.md`.